When you're building for Gatsby by
default, the way that Gatsby works is to
put all of the pages, both server side
rendered and client side rendered.
So you start by building
the site down to static files, so
that if JavaScript is disabled,
you can still load the page.
When the component hits the browser and
rehydrates,
it then like JavaScript fires, mounts
the page builds a react version of it and
you end up with a fully functional react
app on top of this the static route.
In client only rendering,
what you end up with is you run into these
situations where let's say, for
example, you wanna build a search page.
So your search results page cannot exist
without some kind of input from the user.
It's completely impractical to
try to guess all of the possible
search combinations that could exist and
build that ahead of time.
So instead what we do is we wanna build
what's called a client only route where
there is no server side rendering step,
we're instead gonna say hey Gatsby only,
like, put this file out there so
that all of the logic happens
only when we get to the client.
So if you load this with JavaScript
disabled, it's gonna be an empty page.
So with that being said, what I wanna do
is let's actually build ourselves a search
component and the way I'm gonna do that
is let's start by giving it a few styles.
So we're going to do a search.module.CSS.
And this is because we're gonna have
a search field search button and
like a clear reset button.
And I wanna make sure that those
aren't just like gencon jank,
we're gonna do a little
bit of styling on it.
So we'll have a form in that
will make that display flex.
I am a big fan of display flex if you
haven't already picked up on that.
And we can go space between so that they
kinda equally distributed across the page.
We'll give them a gap of 1rem.
For the search input,
I want this to be font size of 1rem.
So a thing that is a little bit
frustrating and a little bit confusing
about inputs, is by default,
they don't respect the document font size.
So by doing this font size 1 rem,
the font size
in the input will actually be the same as
the font size for the rest of the CSS.
And another little fun fact is if
you've ever been on a website and
you tap into like a search bar or
to enter your email and the page zooms in.
That's because the font is
smaller than 16 pixels.
So if you want to avoid your website
zooming in when people touch your
inputs on a browser, make the font
bigger and it will stop doing that.
So this will prevent that
from happening effectively.
Then we're going to set padding,
or 0.25 on the top and bottom so
that it's got a little bit of
breathing room and one on the left and
right to give it some input like shape.
Then we'll set the width to be 100%.
And I want that to basically occupy all
the available space that the buttons
aren't using.
Then for the buttons,
we're gonna do a font size of 1 rem,
and we'll do, just the the same padding.
So let's do 0.25 and 1.
And I think that's good enough, right?
So then let's go in and
let's make our first page.
So the way that Gatsby works is we
looked at these file based routes here.
Gatsby also supports something
called dynamic routes.
So if we create, let's say,
like a search folder And in this,
I wanted to make everything that hits that
search route hit like the same component.
We can do what's called a catch all,
which is the brackets and
three dots and then dot js.
This is very cool, it's very helpful and
it gives us the ability to say if you hit
search, go ahead and just bring everything
at this sub route into this page and
we'll do stuff with it on the client side.
So in here we are going to write a react
component as usual import react from
react.
And then I also wanna get
the navigate library out of Gatsby.
And what this navigate library does
is it lets us do programmatic.
So the same thing that link does, where
when you click it, it takes you to another
page and all those things, navigate
lets us do that but programmatically.
Then I'm gonna get my style, so
my form, my input and my button.
And I don't know why it came out of that.
Let's get it out of styles,
got to go up another level,
cuz we're in the search folder here we're
gonna get styles and search.module.CSS.
Then we can export default function,
we'll call it search client only and
this gives us params.
So what params is, is whatever is in
the URL, and it gets broken up by slashes,
so if we have one thing, it'll show us
like a little well, let's just look at it.
And actually it's easier
to show than to explain.
So what we'll do is we'll get query.
Actually, let's start by just doing
this let's console.log params.
And then let's make it visual,
let's do return pre JSON stringify params.
Okay, so this will give us the ability
to hit anything in the search.
So let's look, we got started,
let's start the server.
Now that this has started,
when we look at the search,
we can see that because we used to
catch all route, it gives us this star.
And that star is like
everything that's in here.
And so we can put whatever we
want in here, some more stuff.
And it'll just feed us that path,
whatever we put in here.
And so if we were to do something like
our search query we wanted to search for,
I don't know, the hobbit.
It just gives us the search
text right there.
So we can actually build
a search form like that and
it's all coming right through the page.
So let's do that,
let's build ourselves a search form.
So what I'm gonna do is I want to in here,
get our query.
And that'll be,
we're gonna decode the URL components.
We don't want any like percent 20s or
things like that.
We will get whatever
comes out of params star.
And then we want to use some react stuff.
So we're gonna store the current query and
then we'll have the ability
to set the current query.
And that's gonna be react use state.
And we'll start with
the whatever the query is,
then we're gonna keep our results.
So we're gonna do a search,
we wanna hold on to the search result.
So have the ability to set the results and
that's going to be in react, use state.
And we'll set that to null by default.
And then we want to do a status and
set status.
And this I hope that David Khurshid who
wrote x date is not watching because
he's gonna send me angry email,
but I'm gonna use a kind of a.
Status flag, like what are we doing?
So then in here,
I'm going to add a couple functions.
So the first one is we wanna
be able to handle the search.
And so when we get a search, we're gonna
get, it's gonna be as form submission.
And so the first thing that we wanna
do is prevent that form from actually
submitting.
We instead want to grab that here,
so we're gonna prevent default.
That'll prevent the form from
actually submitting in one set,
let us deal with it.
Then I wanna get the form data,
which will be using the built
in browser form data API.
If you've never used this, this is
something that when I learned about it,
as soon as Hinton pointed it out to me,
I felt like a dang superhero I had
been doing this the hard way prior
to this and wow, is this easier.
So I can actually just get
whatever the name of the field is.
So if I've got my field down here,
let's set these up so
we can kinda look at what happens.
If I've got a form and
the way that form is gonna work,
I'm not gonna fully mark it up yet, but
if we've got an Input of a type search and
we give it a name of search.
Then what I can do up here is do
a form.getsearchand I'll get whatever
the value of this is.
It's so easy, It's built into the browser.
Yeah, form management has
really used to scare me and
now I know I don't mind it,
I kinda like it.
Then once we've got that we can set the
current query to be whatever the query is.
And then I'm also going to navigate the
browser I wanna send this to search and
we will encode the URL component for
queries so
that we don't have any,
if there's URL characters or
any special characters in the string,
it won't break our URL.
And once we've navigated, that'll be
the end of how we handle our search.
So, the other thing that we
wanna handle is just a reset.
So let's create a function
called handle search reset.
That is going to just set the current
query to nothing, make it blank.
And then we'll navigate back to search.
Okay, so that's that function.
And the last one I'm not
gonna write just yet.
Let's stub it out though.
So it's gonna be a function
called Book Search.
It's gonna take a query.
And that one is going to, Look up a book.
So the other thing that we're
gonna do is we want to watch for
whenever the current query changes.
So we're gonna use effect for that.
And the way that use effect works is we
pass in an array of what we wanna track.
So we're gonna pass in current query.
And then we can do stuff whenever
the current query happens.
So what I wanna do is if
the current query is empty.
We're just gonna set
the result to know and
we'll just return will be done.
There's nothing else
that we wanna do there.
Otherwise if the current
query is not empty,
we're gonna run this Book Search and
and pass it in.
So this is what's actually
gonna run our search,
whenever we update the current query here,
this will cause the search to run.
And then in here is where
we'll set the result so
that we can show it on the screen.
So let's build out our basic form, so
let's tell people where they are,
we'll say, search for a book.
And then in our form.
So our form is gonna have
a class name of form and
on submit we're gonna
run that handle search.
Inside of that we have the input and
we'll give this a class name of input.
Then we'll do a button.
That button will have
a class name of button.
The text on it will be search.
And that's really all
that buttons gonna do.
So let's duplicate that one.
And this one's gonna be different.
This is gonna be a type reset button.
And this will say, what's it gonna say?
We'll call it reset.
And then let's also give it an unclick.
Of handling the surgery set.
So effectively what we're doing here
is we're saying, in this search form,
let's look at what it looks like.
Form is not defined.
What are they?
There we go.
So now we've got this search and
so what a reset type is
if I say some value If I reset
it clears the form, right?
And this is also built into a search form.
So there's ways to do that.
And then what we should see here is
we won't get any results yet but
if I search, we should see it update.
There it is.
We get the hobbit up in the screen,
in the search bar.
So, pretty sweet,
pretty helpful, very useful.
And the next thing for us to do is
to actually write this book query.
So let's do that.
And the way that we're gonna do
that is we're gonna use that open
Library Search again.
So the first thing I wanna do,
is I'm gonna set the status
of our document to loading.
So this is kind of very
bad state management.
Then we're gonna do a response
which will be a waiting, fetch and
I'm going to Https,
we wanna hit openlibrary.org.
We're gonna hit the search.jsonendpoint.
And this works with just a queue and
then whatever our query is, so
we can pass in the query just like that.
This is,
let me make that a little bit bigger so
we can actually see what's going on.
So we're gonna fetch that, and
then after we have fetched that we'll
check down here if res is not okay.
So if something went wrong with the with
the query, we will just throw a new error,
because that would mean that something
went wrong with the search and
so it's okay to fail if that's the case.
We probably want more graceful error
handling we're not going for perfect.
We're going for learning today.
Okay, so If we get past here,
we know that we've got a good result.
So let's get our results.
It'll be await res Jason,
because we know we're getting back Jason
because we call the Jason endpoint.
And then,
we can set our results to result.
And we can set our status to idle.
And so effectively what we've done now,
is we've created a little poorly managed
state machine, that will say kinda
where things are, and down here,
what we can do is we can start to
respond to that in the UI a little bit.
So, what I'm gonna do is if our status
is loading we wanna show
something like loading.
Results, right?
And then if our status is idle and
the current query is not, that's what
I was trying to push, is not empty.
Then we want to show results.
Otherwise, we're just gonna show null.
So let's get these results shown here.
We'll do an h2, say search results for,
CurrentQuery and then down here, we'll
just set them up as an unordered list.
Make sure that we've got a result because
it's always possible that it comes
back empty.
And then we'll go through the result.docs.
So what comes back from
the search is metadata and
then docs is the actual list of results.
We can map those, get to doc,
and inside here we can set up a li key.
So doc.key is a,
that's a unique field in there.
And I don't wanna teach how
the open library API works.
So I'm kinda just flying
through what the fields are.
What we could do is run this in
the browser and look at the fields and
then kind of reverse engineer it.
But for the sake of not
getting too lost in the weeds,
I'm trying to make sure that we
cover this as quickly as possible.
So we've got the strong tag here
that's gonna show the title and
I want that to be the doc.title.
And then I'm gonna put in who
the doc.author is if the author is set,
so I'm gonna say doc.author_name,
which is gonna be an array actually.
Oddly enough, being singular, and then,
so we'll say, doc.author_name and
then I wanna optionally chain this
because it might be set and still empty.
So just trying to guard
against unexpected chaos here.
So let's save that.
And this should work, right?
Let's give it a try.
So, hey, look it's already doing it.
So we've searched for the Hobbit.
Let's search for another book.
Ready Player One.
There we go, we've got results.
Let's search for just one more.
What's another book?
I've only read two books, apparently.
Another book that I've read
that I liked was Zen and
the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance.
And there it is.
So this is cool, right?
And we can make this more useful.
We could link to a doc page, we could
figure out a way to hook this ISBM up to
another page where we could
get more information.
But I'm not worried about that,
I just kinda wanna show how you would
set up these client-only pages.
And as you can see, this is not
a particularly simple component but
the nice thing about it is that
everything that's happening in here with
the exception of this navigate calls.
These are all being done as it's just
React, the only Gatsby specific thing
we're pulling in here is
this navigate function and
the fact that this file is named something
funky to make Gatsby pick it up wherever.
The other thing that's called up is
this is also, it's URL navigable.
So if I visit a page,
like I wanna come see the Hobbit,
it'll load the Hobbit for me.
So I didn't pull it out and
put it in the in the query.
So you could share a set of
search results with somebody.
And so this is nice, right?
It's kind of a stateful transfer
of information if you store
the query in the URL like that.